Oh, for a muse of fire that would ascend
the brightest heaven of invention,
a kingdom for a stage, princes to act,
and monarchs to behold the swelling scene.
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
assume the port of Mars;
and at his heels, leash'd in like hounds,
should famine, sword, and fire crouch for employment.
But pardon, gentles all,
the flat unraised spirits that have dared
on this unworthy scaffold
to bring forth so great an object.
Can this cockpit hold the vasty fields of France?
Or may we cram within this wooden O
the very casques
that did affright the air at Agincourt?
Oh, pardon,
since a crooked figure
may attest in little place a million,
and let us, ciphers to this great accompt,
on your imaginary forces work.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls
are now confined two mighty monarchies,
whose high upreared and abutting fronts
the perilous narrow ocean parts asunder.
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.
Into a thousand parts divide one man,
and make imaginary puissance.
Think, when we talk of horses,
that you see them printing their proud hoofs
i' the receiving earth.
For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,
carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
turning the accomplishment of many years
into an hourglass.
For the which supply, admit me chorus to this history,
who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray,
gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.
My lord, I'll tell you:
that self bill is urged
which in the 11th year of the last king's reign
was like and had indeed against us passed,
but that the scambling and unquiet time
did push it out of further question.
How, my lord, shall we resist it now?
It must be thought on.
If it pass against us,
we lose the better half of our possession,
for all the temporal lands
which men devout by testament have given to the church
would they strip from us;
being valued thus:
as much as would maintain, to the king's honor,
full 15 earls and 1,500 knights,
6,200 good esquires;
and to relief of lazars and weak age,
of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,
100 almshouses right well supplied;
and to the coffers of the king beside,
1,000 pounds by the year.
Thus runs the bill.
This would drink deep.
'Twould drink the cup and all.
But what prevention?
The king is full of grace and fair regard.
And a true lover of the holy Church.
The courses of his youth promised it not.
The breath no sooner left his father's body
but that his wildness, mortified in him,
seemed to die too.
Yea, at that very moment,
consideration like an angel came
and whipped the offending Adam out of him,
leaving his body as a paradise
to envelop and contain celestial spirits.
Never was such a sudden scholar made.
Never came reformation
in a flood with such a heady currance,
scouring faults.
Nor never Hydra-headed willfulness
so soon did lose his seat, and all at once,
as in this king.
We are blessed in the change.
Hear him but reason in divinity,
and, all-admiring, with an inward wish
you would desire the king were made a prelate.
Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,
you would say it hath been all in all his study.
List his discourse of war,
and you shall hear a fearful battle
rendered you in music.
Turn him to any cause of policy,
the Gordian knot of it he will unloose,
familiar as his garter;
that, when he speaks,
the air, a chartered libertine,
is still;
and the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears
to steal his sweet and honeyed sentences
so that the art and practic' part of life
must be the mistress to this theoric--
which is a wonder how His Grace should glean it,
for his addiction was to courses vain;
his companies unlettered, rude, and shallow;
his hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports;
and never noted in him any study, any retirement,
any sequestration from open haunts and popularity.
How now for mitigation
of this bill urged by the commons?
Doth His Majesty incline to it or no?
He seems indifferent,
or rather swaying more upon our part
than cherishing the exhibiters against us,
for I have made an offer to His Majesty,
upon our spiritual convocation
and in regard of causes now in hand,
which I have opened to His Grace at large,
as touching France,
to give a greater sum
than ever at one time the clergy yet did
to his predecessors part withal.
How did this offer seem received, my lord?
With good acceptance of His Majesty,
save that there was not time enough to hear,
as I perceive His Grace would fain have done,
the severals and unhidden passages
of his true titles to some certain dukedoms
and generally to the crown and seat of France
derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.
What was the impediment that broke this off?
The French ambassador, upon that instant,
craved audience.
And the hour, I think, is come to give him hearing.
Is it 4:00?
It is.
Then go we in to know his embassy.
God and His angels guard your sacred throne
and make you long become it.
Sure, we thank you.
My learned lord, we pray you to proceed
and justly and religiously unfold
why the law Salique that they have in France
or should or should not bar us in our claim.
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,
that you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading
or nicely charge your understanding soul
with opening titles miscreate,
whose right suits
not in native colors with the truth,
for God doth know how many now in health
shall drop their blood in approbation
of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Therefore, take heed how you impawn our person,
how you awake our sleeping sword of war.
We charge you, in the name of God, take heed.
Then hear me, gracious sovereign,
and you peers
that owe yourselves, your lives, and services
to this imperial throne.
There is no bar to make against Your Highness' claim to France
but this...
which they produce from Pharamond.
"In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant."
"No woman shall succeed in Salique land,"
which Salique land
the French unjustly gloze to be the realm of France,
and Pharamond the found of this law and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
that the land Salique is in Germany
between the floods of Sala and of Elbe,
where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons,
there left behind and settled certain French,
who, holding in disdain the German women
for some dishonest manners of their life,
established then this law, to wit,
no female should be inheritrix in Salique land--
which Salique, as I said, 'twixt Elbe and Sala,
is at this day in Germany called Meisen.
Then doth it well appear the Salique law
was not devised for the realm of France,
howbeit they would hold up this Salique law
to bar Your Highness claiming from the female
and rather choose to hide them in a net
than amply to imbar their crooked titles
usurp'd from you and your progenitors.
May I with right and conscience make this claim?
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign,
for in the book of Numbers is it writ,
"When the man dies,
let the inheritance descend unto the daughter."
Gracious lord,
stand for your own.
Unwind your bloody flag!
Look back into your mighty ancestors.
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb,
from whom you claim.
Invoke his warlike spirit
and your great-uncle's, Edward the Black Prince.
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
and with your puissant arm renew their feats.
Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth
do all expect that you should rouse yourself,
as did the former lions of your blood.
They know Your Grace hath cause and means and might,
so hath Your Highness.
Never king of England
had nobles richer nor more loyal subjects,
whose hearts have left their bodies
here in England
and lie pavilioned in the fields of France!
Oh, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,
with blood and sword and fire to win your right.
In aid whereof, we of the spiritualty
will raise Your Highness such a mighty sum
as never did the clergy at one time bring in
to any of your ancestors.
We must not only arm to invade the French
but lay down our proportion to defend against the Scot,
who will make road upon us with all advantages.
There is a saying,
very old and true.
"If that you will France win,
then with Scotland first begin."
For once the eagle England being in prey,
to her unguarded nest the weasel Scot comes sneaking
and so sucks her princely eggs,
playing the mouse in absence of the cat
to tear and havoc more than she can eat.
Well, it follows then, the cat must stay at home.
Yet that is but a crush'd necessity,
since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,
the advised head defends itself at home.
For government, though high and low and lower,
put into parts doth keep in one consent,
congreeing in a full and natural close,
like music.
Therefore doth heaven
divide the state of man in divers functions,
setting endeavour in continual motion,
to which is fixed, as an aim or butt, obedience,
for thus work the honey bees,
creatures that, by a rule in nature,
teach the act of order to a peopled kingdom.
They have a king and officers of sorts,
where some, like magistrates, correct at home;
others, like merchants, venture trade abroad;
others, like soldiers, armed in their stings,
make root upon the summer's velvet buds,
which pillage they with merry march
bring home to the tent royal of their emperor,
who, busied in His Majesty,
surveys the singing masons building roofs of gold,
the civil citizens kneading up the honey,
the poor mechanic porters
crowding in their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,
the sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum,
delivering o'er to executors pale
the lazy yawning drone.
I this infer:
that many things,
having full reference to one consent,
may work contrariously,
so many a thousand actions once afoot
end in one purpose
and be all well-borne without defeat.
Therefore to France, my liege!
Divide your happy England into four,
whereof take you one quarter into France,
and you withal shall make all Gallia shake.
If we, with thrice such powers left at home,
cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
let us be worried
and our nation
lose the name of hardiness and policy.
Call in the messengers sent from the dauphin.
Now are we well-resolved,
and by God's help and yours,
the noble sinews of our power,
France, being ours,
#we'll bend it to our awe or break it all to pieces.
Now are we well-prepared
to know the pleasure of our fair cousin dauphin,
for we hear your greeting is from him, not from the king.
May it please Your Majesty to give us leave
freely to render what we have in charge,
or shall we sparingly
show you far off
the dauphin's meaning
and our embassy?
We are no tyrant but a Christian king
unto whose grace our passion is as subject
as are our wretches fettered in our prisons.
Therefore, with frank and with uncurbed plainness,
tell us the dauphin's mind.
Thus, then, in few.
Your Highness, lately sending into France,
did order certain dukedoms
that you claimed of your great predecessor,
King Edward III.
In answer of which claim, the prince, our master,
says that you savor too much of your youth
and bids you be advised there's nought in France
that can be with a nimble galliard won.
You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
this ton of treasure,
and in lieu of this
desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
hear no more of you.
This the dauphin speaks.
What treasure, Uncle?
Tennis balls, my liege.
We are glad the dauphin is so pleasant with us.
His present and your pains we thank you for.
When we have matched our rackets to these balls,
we will, in France, by God's grace,
play a set shall strike his father's crown
into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler
that all the courts of France shall be disturbed with chaces.
And we understand him well,
how he comes o'er us with our wilder days,
not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valued this poor seat of England.
And therefore, living hence,
did give ourself to barbarous license,
as 'tis ever common that men are merriest
when they are from home.
But tell the dauphin I will keep my state,
be like a king,
and show my sail of greatness
when I do rouse me in my throne of France.
For that I have laid by my majesty
and plodded like a man for working days,
but I will rise there with so full a glory
that I shall dazzle all the eyes of France...
yea, strike the dauphin blind to look on us.
And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his
hath turned his balls to gunstones,
and his soul shall stand sore charged
for the wasteful vengeance that shall fly with them,
for many a thousand widows shall this, his mock,
mock out of their dear husbands,
mock mothers from their sons,
mock castles down.
And some are yet ungotten and unborn
that shall have cause to curse the dauphin's scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
to whom I do appeal
and in whose name, tell you the dauphin,
I am coming on to venge me as I may
and to put forth my rightful hand
in a well-hallow'd cause.
So get you hence in peace.
And tell the dauphin his jest will savor but of shallow wit
when thousands weep more than did laugh at it.
Convey them with safe conduct.
Fare you well.
This was a merry message.
We hope to make the sender blush at it.
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour
that may give furtherance to our expedition,
for we have now no thought in us but France,
save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore, let our proportions for these wars
be soon collected
and all things thought upon
that may with reasonable swiftness
add more feathers to our wings,
for, God before,
we'll chide this dauphin at his father's door.
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
and silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies.
Now thrive the armorers,
and honor's thought
reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
following the mirror of all Christian kings,
with winged heels, as English Mercuries,
for now sits expectation in the air
and hides a sword from hilts unto the point
with crowns imperial,
crowns and coronets
promised to Harry and his followers.
The French, advised by good intelligence
of this most dreadful preparation,
shake in their fear
and with pale policy
seek to divert the English purposes.
Oh, England,
model to thy inward greatness,
like little body with a mighty heart,
what mightst thou do-- that honor would thee do--
were all thy children kind and natural.
But see thy fault.
France hath in thee found out a nest of hollow bosoms,
which he fills with treacherous crowns,
and three corrupted men--
one Richard, Earl of Cambridge;
and the second, Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham;
and the third, Sir Thomas Grey, Knight of Northumberland--
have, for the gilt of France-- oh, guilt indeed--
confirmed conspiracy with fearful France.
And by their hands,
this grace of kings must die
if hell and treason hold their promises
ere he take ship for France and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on,
and we'll digest the abuse of distance,
force a play.
The sum is paid,
the traitors are agreed,
the king is set from London,
and the scene is now transported, gentles,
to Southampton.
There is the playhouse now.
There must you sit,
and thence to France shall we convey you safe
and bring you back,
charming the narrow seas to give you gentle pass,
for, if we may,
we'll not offend one stomach with our play.
But, till the king come forth and not till then,
unto Southampton do we shift our scene.